Add E2E Gardener upgrade test (#7122)
gardener/gardener: docs/development/testing.md

This allows running e2e tests in an isolated test environment, fully locally without any infrastructure interaction.
The tests perform a set of operations on Shoot clusters, e.g. create, delete, hibernate and wake up.

Below is a sequence describing how the tests are performed.

- Create a `kind` cluster.
- Install Gardener version `vX.X.X`.
- Run gardener pre-upgrade tests which are labeled with `pre-upgrade`.
- Upgrade Gardener version from `vX.X.X` to `vY.Y.Y`.
- Run gardener post-upgrade tests which are labeled with `post-upgrade`
- Tear down seed and kind cluster.

### How to run upgrade tests between two Gardener releases

Sometimes, we need to verify/qualify two Gardener releases when we upgrade from one version to another.  
This can performed by fetching the two Gardener versions from **[Github Gardener release page](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)** and set appropriate env variables `GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`, `GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE`.   

> >**`GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`** -- This env variable refers to a source release which has to be installed first and then upgraded to version **`GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE`**. By default it fetches latest release version from  **[Github Gardener release page](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)**.

Reviewer: Is there currently a way to select a particular commit in the revision history which I can use as my "pre-release" version, rather than a release version?
My use-case is: let's say I want to check if a particular PR breaks the system or not. I would like to first install gardener from the HEAD commit of latest master, create some shoots, then checkout my PR branch and upgrade gardener from my PR commit to check whether my PR causes any regressions.

Author: Fixed

  - generally, try to use the default settings for `Eventually` specified via the environment variables
  - only set higher timeouts if waiting for long-running reconciliations to be finished

> ## Gardener Upgrade Tests (using provider-local)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Gardener Upgrade Tests (using provider-local)

```

> Gardener upgrade tests will setup kind cluster and deploys gardener version `vX.X.X` then it upgrades to given version `vY.Y.Y`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gardener upgrade tests setup a kind cluster and deploy Gardener version `vX.X.X` before upgrading it to a given version `vY.Y.Y`.
```

> This allow us to qualify/verify the current g/g revision/branch (not yet released) or a specific release whether it is compatible with latest or a specific release (**`GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`**).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows verifying whether the current (unreleased) revision/branch (or a specific release) is compatible with the latest (or a specific other release). The `GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE` and `GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE` environment variables are used to specify the respective versions.
```

> This helps us to understand real time scenario what happens or how it reacts when gardener upgrades from version `vX.X.X` to `vY.Y.Y` for existing shoots in different states (`creation`/`hibernation`/`wakeup`/`deletion`). Gardener upgrade tests also help us to qualify releases for all flavors **non-HA**, **HA** with failure tolerance `node`/`zone`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This helps understanding what happens or how the system reacts when Gardener upgrades from versions `vX.X.X` to `vY.Y.Y` for existing shoots in different states (`creation`/`hibernation`/`wakeup`/`deletion`). Gardener upgrade tests also help qualifying releases for all flavors (**non-HA** or **HA** with failure tolerance `node`/`zone`). 
```

> Just like E2E test also a [KinD cluster](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) and [skaffold](https://skaffold.dev/) to bootstrap a full installation of Gardener based on the current revision/branch, including [provider-local](../extensions/provider-local.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just like E2E tests, upgrade tests also use a [KinD cluster](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) and [skaffold](https://skaffold.dev/) for bootstrapping a full Gardener installation based on the current revision/branch, including [provider-local](../extensions/provider-local.md).
```

> This allows us to run e2e tests in an isolated test environment, fully locally without any infrastructure interaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows running e2e tests in an isolated test environment, fully locally without any infrastructure interaction.
```

The tests perform a set of operations on Shoot clusters, e.g. create, delete, hibernate and wake up.

Below is a sequence describing how the tests are performed.

- Create a `kind` cluster.
- Install Gardener version `vX.X.X`.
- Run gardener pre-upgrade tests which are labeled with `pre-upgrade`.
- Upgrade Gardener version from `vX.X.X` to `vY.Y.Y`.
- Run gardener post-upgrade tests which are labeled with `post-upgrade`

> - Tear down seed and cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Tear down seed and kind cluster.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Debugging e2e Tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Debugging upgrade Tests
```

> ### Debugging e2e Tests

Reviewer 2: The title says "Debugging", but I don't see information how to debug failing tests in this section.

> Gardener upgrade tests can be executed for both non-HA and HA environments. Tests are defined here [upgrade.go](../../test/e2e/gardener/upgrade/upgrade.go)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gardener upgrade tests can be executed for both non-HA and HA environments. Tests are defined [here](../../test/e2e/gardener/upgrade/upgrade.go).
```

> - `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind` -- This will setup a non-HA environment and executes gardener upgrade tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind` -- This will setup a non-HA environment and execute upgrade tests.
```

> - `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-single-zone` -- This will setup a HA environment with failure tolerance `node` and executes gardener upgrade tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-single-zone` -- This will setup a HA environment with failure tolerance `node` and execute upgrade tests.
```

> - `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-multi-zone` This will setup a HA environment with failure tolerance `node` and executes gardener upgrade tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-multi-zone` This will setup a HA environment with failure tolerance `node` and execute upgrade tests.
```

> By default if we run one of the above command, it will try to qualify current revision of g/g code against **[latest Gardener release](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the current revision of the `master` branch is verified against the **[latest Gardener release](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)**. 
```

> If we want to qualify a specific release, then set this variable **`GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`** with specific release value.
> 
> ``` 
> make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE=v1.60.0
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Not needed anymore (written above)

### How to run upgrade tests between two Gardener releases

> Sometime we need to verify/qualify two gardener releases when we upgrade from one version to another.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, we need to verify/qualify two Gardener releases when we upgrade from one version to another.  
```

This is tiring. Do you mind running a spell checker next time?

This can performed by fetching the two Gardener versions from **[Github Gardener release page](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)** and set appropriate env variables `GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`, `GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE`.   

>**`GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`** -- This env variable refers to a source release which has to be installed first and then upgraded to version **`GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE`**. By default it fetches latest release version from  **[Github Gardener release page](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases/latest)**.

>**`GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE`** -- This env variable refers to the target version to be upgraded to after successful installation of **`GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE`**. By default it considers local HEAD revision, builds code and installs gardener from current revision where gardener upgrade tests triggered.

- `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE=v1.60.0 GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE=v1.61.0`
- `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-single-zone GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE=v1.60.0 GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE=v1.61.0`

> - `make ci-e2e-gardener-upgrade-kind-ha-multi-zone GARDENER_PREVIOUS_RELEASE=v1.60.0 GARDENER_NEXT_RELEASE=v1.61.0`

Reviewer 2: This is also explained above already. Why replicating it here?

> ### Purpose of e2e Tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Purpose of upgrade Tests
```

> - tests will ensure previous version of gardener shoot's will work as expected in next(current revision)/specific Gardener release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- tests will ensure that shoot clusters reconciled with the previous version of Gardener work as expected even with the next Gardener version.
```

- this will reproduce or catch actual issues faced by end users.

> - one of the test case ensures no downtime faced by end-users for shoots while upgrading gardener if shoot's control-plane is configured as HA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- one of the test case ensures no downtime faced by end-users for shoots while upgrading Gardener if shoot's control-plane is configured as HA.
```

> ### Writing e2e Tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Writing upgrade Tests

```
